Actually, we have 13 columns (and 2201 rows) of data in our csv file. It contains the necessary flight data and unnecessary flight data. Necessary data – Scheduled departure times (CRS_DEP_TIME), Origin (ORIGIN), Destination (DEST), Day of the month that the flight took place (DAY_OF_MONTH), Weather (Weather), Fight Status (FlightStatus). And Unnecessary flight data – Carrier information (flight type), Flight Tail number, etc. So, we want to remove the unnecessary data for the machine learning model to be optimistic that is important step in process is to select the relevant feature columns and eliminating the remaining which would lead to better prediction (but should not affect our prediction) of whether the flight is on-time or delayed. Next step is to find if there are any missing or null (NaN) values in the data, since our data didn’t have any, we didn’t do anything regarding this. Now, CRS_DEP_TIME column contains more no. of unique values we have to do binning (using Math module) so that this column will be more suitable for machine learning model. And the ORIGIN & DEST contains qualitative values so we convert these values in quantitative (discrete values) by using dummy variables (using pandas). So, since we have three unique values in ORIGIN column, now we are going to have three different columns, same case with the DEST column. And we will drop/eliminate the original ORIGIN & DEST columns.

Now, we will the split (using scikit learn’s train_test_spilt) our dataset into two sets: training set (to train our machine learning model) – 60% of our whole dataset and testing set (to evaluate the performance our machine learning model) – 40% of our whole dataset. And we will also separate our dataset into feature columns (columns used as input to the model) and label columns (column that the model will attempt to predict – FlightStatus column). Since, our model is to predict whether the flight is on-time or delayed that is binary class classification problem, so it is a classification problem, therefore our model is classifier. One of the best accurate models for our data is Random Forest Classifier, which fits multiple decision trees to the data and uses averaging to boost the overall accuracy and limit the overfitting. We will implement this algorithm using the scikit-learn module. So, now we will train our classifier with training dataset and predict the accuracy with test dataset. There are different ways to predict the accuracy of our classification model like score method – gives us mean accuracy, calculating area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC AUC) - quantifies how often the model will make a correct prediction regardless of the outcome. The accuracy for our classifier using score method is 79.79%. And the accuracy for our classifier using ROC AUC is 72.24% which is lower than score method’s. Since, the output from the score method reflects how many of the items in the test set the model predicted correctly. This score is skewed by the fact that the dataset the model was trained and tested with contains many more rows representing on-time arrivals than rows representing late arrivals. Because of this imbalance in the data, you're more likely to be correct if you predict that a flight will be on time than if you predict that a flight will be late, ROC AUC takes this into account and provides a more accurate indication of how likely it is that a prediction of ontime or delayed will be correct. By generating confusion/error matrix we can even learn more detail about our model. For our dataset, the confusion matrix – array ([ 55, 108], [ 70, 648]); which tells us about our classifier classified correctly 648 flights that are ontime and misclassified 70 as ontime, and correctly classified 55 as delayed and misclassified 108 as delayed. We can also find the accuracy measures like precision and recall.

Now, we got all that so we are now ready to predict the flight is ontime or delayed for this we need to code (a python function, say predict_delay). We feed all our relevant features as input to this function, which uses our machine learning model, to predict the outcome (FlightStatus) for a flight. The outcome will be between 0 and 1, indicating the probability whether the flight is delayed (or not).

And we visualize our outcome (probability of whether the flight will be delayed or not) using the histogram (using Matplotlib & Seaborn modules).
